---
id: the-business-case-for-api
title: The Business Case for APIs
---

It's no secret that the web powers a large portion of new product innovation and the technology market today. As a result, APIs are more important than ever in creating a business, and there are many models for incorporating them into a product. In some cases, an API will lead to direct profit and monetization (via profit share models, subscription fees, or usage fees). But there are also many other reasons you might want to create an API. APIs might support your company's overall product strategy. They might be a critical piece of the puzzle for integrating third-party services with your company's product. APIs might be part of a strategy to incentivize others to build supplemental products in which the developer of the main product is unwilling or unable to invest. APIs might also be a way to generate leads, create new distribution channels for a product, or upsell products. An API must be aligned with the core business, as is the case with many software as a service (SaaS) companies. Notable examples are GitHub, Salesforce, and Stripe. Sometimes, the products built on these APIs are referred to as "service integrations." Consumer APIs work well if there is a critical mass of user-generated content, such as with Facebook and Flickr's photo-sharing capabilities. Although there are many reasons to create an API and launch a developer platform, there is also a clear reason not to create a developer platform when the API strategy is not aligned with the core business. For example, if the product's main revenue stream is advertisements, APIs that enable alternative "clients" for the product will drive traffic away from the experience where the ads are hosted. That will take away from revenue share, as was the case with the Twitter API. 
Monetization and business incentives aside, let's take a more detailed look at the following ways that some companies have structured their API development: 

- APIs for internal developers first, external developers second 
- APIs for external developers first, internal developers second 
- APIs as the product 

## APIs for Internal Developers First, External Developers Second 

Some companies build their APIs for internal developers first and then release them to external developers. There could be a number of motivations for this. One reason might be that the company sees potential value in adding an external API. This could create a developer ecosystem, drive new demand for the company's product, or enable other companies to build products that the company itself does not want to build. To take a look at a specific instance, let's explore how Slack's API started-as an API for Slack's web, native desktop, and mobile clients to display a messaging interface. Although Slack originally created its APIs for its internal developers, something else happened as the company grew: a handful of "integrations" with important business software became a key piece of the puzzle for Slack's growth and development as communication software. Instead of building bespoke apps to integrate its offering with other companies, Slack launched its Developer Platform and a suite of products for third-party developers to build their own apps, both at established companies and at new startups. This move on Slack's part helped to grow the ecosystem for apps that integrate with Slack's messaging platform. It also meant that users of Slack who also used other business software could seamlessly collaborate where communication was already happening in the Slack messaging client. The advantage to Slack's APIs at the time of its Developer Platform launch was that the APIs were already tested and well used by internal developers. The disadvantages to this approach showed up over time as the needs of external developers drifted apart from the needs of internal developers. Internal developers needed flexibility to create new experiences for end users of the messaging client, from new types of shared channels, files, and messages, to other increasingly complex communication experiences. Meanwhile, third-party developers were no longer creating replacement client user interfaces (UIs) for Slack they started to create powerful business applications and tools that were designed for workflows rather than message display. External developers also required stability, and the tension between API backward compatibility and the need to change the API for new product features had a cost on project velocity within Slack. 

## APIs for External Developers First, Internal Developers Second

Some companies create APIs for external stakeholders first and then release them to internal stakeholders. That's how GitHub has operated since the beginning. Let's take a look at how and why GitHub developed its API and how its developer audience has affected the evolution of the API. In the beginning, GitHub's API audience was primarily external developers who wanted to gain programmatic access to their own data. Shortly after the initial release of their API, small businesses began to form around GitHub's API. These businesses were creating developer tools and selling them to GitHub's users. Since then, GitHub has expanded its API offering significantly. It has built an API that serves both individuals who want to create their own personal projects or workflows and teams that want to collaborate to build bot scripts or workflow tools that integrate with GitHub. These teams, called integrators, build developer tools, connect users with GitHub's platform, and sell these tools to mutual customers. 
When it came time for GitHub to build its GraphQL API, third-party developers were the first consumers. GraphQL is a query interface for web APIs. Although it isn't the first such interface, it gained a bit of buzz prior to the writing of this book due to its implementation by Facebook, a well-known API provider, and its adoption by GitHub, another well-known API provider. After third-party developers began to use GitHub's new GraphQL API, internal GitHub developers also adopted it to power the GitHub web UI and client applications. In GitHub's case, the API had a clear intention to serve external stakeholders first and then eventually evolved to serve internal developers as well. One advantage to this approach is that the API can be customized to serve external developers, rather than straddling two audiences. As GitHub's API evolved, it was able to annotate its JSON responses with more and more data that developers needed. Eventually, the payloads were so large that GitHub implemented GraphQL so that developers could specify the fields they wanted with the queries. One disadvantage to this approach in the case of GraphQL is that due to the flexibility that GraphQL gives developers, performance bottlenecks that emerge are spread across a variety of access patterns. This can make troubleshooting tricker than when working with a single endpoint at a time, for example in the case of REST. 

## APIs as the Product 

For some companies, the API is the product. Such is the case with Stripe and Twilio. Stripe provides APIs for payment processing on the internet. Twilio provides APIs for communication via SMS, voice, and messaging. In the case of these two companies, building an API is 100% aligned with a single-product audience. The API is the product, and the entire business aligns behind building a seamless interface for customers. As far as managing APIs and meeting user needs, the API as the product is the most straightforward company arrangement possible. 